Streaming
=========

Lazy IO
-------

The problem with using the usual monadic approach to processing data accumulated through IO is that the
Prelude tools require us to manifest large amounts of data in memory all at once before we can even begin
computation.

```haskell
mapM :: Monad m => (a -> m b) -> [a] -> m [b]
sequence :: Monad m => [m a] -> m [a]
```

Reading from the file creates a thunk for the string that forced will then read the file. The problem is then
that this method ties the ordering of IO effects to evaluation order which is difficult to reason about in the
large.

Consider that normally the monad laws ( in the absence of `seq` ) guarantee that these computations should be
identical. But using lazy IO we can construct a degenerate case.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/25-streaming/lazyio.hs"}
~~~~

So what we need is a system to guarantee deterministic resource handling with constant memory usage. To that
end both the Conduits and Pipes libraries solved this problem using different ( though largely equivalent )
approaches.

Pipes
-----

```haskell
await :: Monad m => Pipe a y m a
yield :: Monad m => a -> Pipe x a m ()

(>->) :: Monad m
      => Pipe a b m r
      -> Pipe b c m r
      -> Pipe a c m r

runEffect :: Monad m => Effect m r -> m r
toListM :: Monad m => Producer a m () -> m [a]
```

Pipes is a stream processing library with a strong emphasis on the static semantics of composition. The
simplest usage is to connect "pipe" functions with a ``(>->)`` composition operator, where each component can
``await`` and ``yield`` to push and pull values along the stream.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/25-streaming/pipes.hs"}
~~~~

For example we could construct a "FizzBuzz" pipe.


~~~~ {.haskell include="src/25-streaming/pipes_io.hs"}
~~~~

To continue with the degenerate case we constructed with Lazy IO, consider than we can now compose and sequence
deterministic actions over files without having to worry about effect order.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/25-streaming/pipes_file.hs"}
~~~~

This is simple a sampling of the functionality of lens. The documentation for
pipes is extensive and great deal of care has been taken make the library
extremely thorough. ``pipes`` is a shining example of an accessible yet category
theoretic driven design.

See: [Pipes Tutorial](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/pipes-4.1.0/docs/Pipes-Tutorial.html)

Safe Pipes
----------

```haskell
bracket :: MonadSafe m => Base m a -> (a -> Base m b) -> (a -> m c) -> m c
```

As a motivating example, ZeroMQ is a network messaging library that abstracts over traditional Unix sockets to
a variety of network topologies.  Most notably it isn't designed to guarantee any sort of transactional
guarantees for delivery or recovery in case of errors so it's necessary to design a layer on top of it to
provide the desired behavior at the application layer.

In Haskell we'd like to guarantee that if we're polling on a socket we get messages delivered in a timely
fashion or consider the resource in an error state and recover from it. Using ``pipes-safe`` we can manage the
life cycle of lazy IO resources and can safely handle failures, resource termination and finalization
gracefully. In other languages this kind of logic would be smeared across several places, or put in some
global context and prone to introduce errors and subtle race conditions. Using pipes we instead get a nice
tight abstraction designed exactly to fit this kind of use case.

For instance now we can bracket the ZeroMQ socket creation and finalization within the ``SafeT`` monad
transformer which guarantees that after successful message delivery we execute the pipes function as expected,
or on failure we halt the execution and finalize the socket.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/25-streaming/pipes_safe.hs"}
~~~~

Conduits
--------

```haskell
await :: Monad m => ConduitM i o m (Maybe i)
yield :: Monad m => o -> ConduitM i o m ()
($$) :: Monad m => Source m a -> Sink a m b -> m b
(=$) :: Monad m => Conduit a m b -> Sink b m c -> Sink a m c

type Sink i = ConduitM i Void
type Source m o = ConduitM () o m ()
type Conduit i m o = ConduitM i o m ()
```

Conduits are conceptually similar though philosophically different approach to the same problem of constant
space deterministic resource handling for IO resources.

The first initial difference is that await function now returns a ``Maybe`` which allows different handling of
termination. The composition operators are also split into a connecting operator (``$$``) and a fusing
operator (``=$``) for combining Sources and Sink and a Conduit and a Sink respectively.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/25-streaming/conduit.hs"}
~~~~

See: [Conduit Overview](https://www.fpcomplete.com/user/snoyberg/library-documentation/conduit-overview)
