Parsing
=======

Parsec
------

For parsing in Haskell it is quite common to use a family of libraries known as *Parser Combinators* which let
us write code to generate parsers which themselves looks very similar to the parser grammar itself!

              Combinators
-----------   ------------
``<|>``       The choice operator tries to parse the first argument before proceeding to the second. Can be chained sequentially to a generate a sequence of options.
``many``      Consumes an arbitrary number of patterns matching the given pattern and returns them as a list.
``many1``     Like many but requires at least one match.
``optional``  Optionally parses a given pattern returning it's value as a Maybe.
``try``       Backtracking operator will let us parse ambiguous matching expressions and restart with a different pattern.

There are two styles of writing Parsec, one can choose to write with monads or with applicatives.

```haskell
parseM :: Parser Expr
parseM = do
  a <- identifier
  char '+'
  b <- identifier
  return $ Add a b
```

The same code written with applicatives uses the applicative combinators:

```haskell
-- | Sequential application.
(<*>) :: f (a -> b) -> f a -> f b

-- | Sequence actions, discarding the value of the first argument.
(*>) :: f a -> f b -> f b
(*>) = liftA2 (const id)

-- | Sequence actions, discarding the value of the second argument.
(<*) :: f a -> f b -> f a
(<*) = liftA2 const
```

```haskell
parseA :: Parser Expr
parseA = Add <$> identifier <* char '+' <*> identifier
```

Now for instance if we want to parse simple lambda expressions we can encode the parser logic as compositions
of these combinators which yield the string parser when evaluated under with the ``parse``.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/24-parsing/simple_parser.hs"}
~~~~

Custom Lexer
------------

In our previous example lexing pass was not necessary because each lexeme mapped to a sequential collection
of characters in the stream type. If we wanted to extend this parser with a non-trivial set of tokens, then
Parsec provides us with a set of functions for defining lexers and integrating these with the parser
combinators. The simplest example builds on top of the builtin Parsec language definitions which define a set
of most common lexical schemes.

```haskell
haskellDef   :: LanguageDef st
emptyDef     :: LanguageDef st
haskellStyle :: LanguageDef st
javaStyle    :: LanguageDef st
```

For instance we'll build on top of the empty language grammar.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/24-parsing/lexer.hs"}
~~~~

See: [Text.ParserCombinators.Parsec.Language](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/parsec-3.1.5/docs/Text-ParserCombinators-Parsec-Language.html)

Simple Parsing
--------------

Putting our lexer and parser together we can write down a more robust parser for our little lambda calculus
syntax.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/24-parsing/parser.hs"}
~~~~

Trying it out:

```bash
λ: runhaskell simpleparser.hs
1+2
Op Add (Num 1) (Num 2)

\i -> \x -> x
Lam "i" (Lam "x" (Var "x"))

\s -> \f -> \g -> \x -> f x (g x)
Lam "s" (Lam "f" (Lam "g" (Lam "x" (App (App (Var "f") (Var "x")) (App (Var "g") (Var "x"))))))
```

Stateful Parsing
----------------

For a more complex use, consider parser that are internally stateful, for example adding operators that can
defined at parse-time and are dynamically added to the ``expressionParser`` table upon definition.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/24-parsing/parsec_operators.hs"}
~~~~

For example input try:

```haskell
infixl 3 ($);
infixr 4 (#);

infix 4 (.);

prefix 10 (-);
postfix 10 (!);

let z = y in a $ a $ (-a)!;
let z = y in a # a # a $ b; let z = y in a # a # a # b;
```

Generic Parsing
---------------

Previously we defined generic operations for pretty printing and this begs the
question of whether we can write a parser on top of Generics. The answer is
generally yes, so long as there is a direct mapping between the specific lexemes
and sum and products types. Consider the simplest case where we just read off
the names of the constructors using the regular Generics machinery and then
build a Parsec parser terms of them.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/24-parsing/generics.hs"}
~~~~

```haskell
λ: parseTest parseMusician "Bach"
Bach

λ: parseTest parseScientist "Feynman"
Feynman
```

Attoparsec
----------

Attoparsec is a parser combinator like Parsec but more suited for bulk parsing of large text and binary files
instead of parsing language syntax to ASTs. When written properly Attoparsec parsers can be [extremely
efficient](http://www.serpentine.com/blog/2014/05/31/attoparsec/).

One notable distinction between Parsec and Attoparsec is that backtracking
operator (``try``) is not present and reflects on attoparsec's different
underlying parser model.

For a simple little lambda calculus language we can use attoparsec much in the
same we used parsec:

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/24-parsing/attoparsec_lang.hs"}
~~~~

For an example try the above parser with the following simple lambda expression.

~~~~ {.ocaml include="src/24-parsing/simple.ml"}
~~~~

Attoparsec adapts very well to binary and network protocol style parsing as
well, this is extracted from a small implementation of a distributed consensus
network protocol:

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/24-parsing/attoparsec.hs"}
~~~~

See: [Text Parsing Tutorial](https://www.fpcomplete.com/school/starting-with-haskell/libraries-and-frameworks/text-manipulation/attoparsec)
