Type Families
=============

MultiParam Typeclasses
----------------------

Resolution of vanilla Haskell 98 typeclasses proceeds via very simple context
reduction that minimizes interdependency between predicates, resolves
superclasses, and reduces the types to head normal form. For example:

```haskell
(Eq [a], Ord [a]) => [a]
==> Ord a => [a]
```

If a single parameter typeclass expresses a property of a type ( i.e. it's in a
class or not in class ) then a multiparamater typeclass expresses relationships
between types. For example whether if we wanted to express the relation a type
can be converted to another type we might use a class like:

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/16-type-families/mparam.hs"}
~~~~

Of course now our instances for ``Convertible Int`` are not unique anymore, so
there no longer exists a nice procedure for determining the inferred type of
``b`` from just ``a``. To remedy this let's add a functional dependency ``a ->
b``, which says tells GHC that an instance ``a`` uniquely determines the
instance that b can be.  So we'll see that our two instances relating ``Int`` to
both ``Integer`` and ``Char`` conflict.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/16-type-families/mparam_fun.hs"}
~~~~

```haskell
Functional dependencies conflict between instance declarations:
  instance Convertible Int Integer
  instance Convertible Int Char
```

Now there's a simpler procedure for determining instances uniquely and
multiparamater typeclasses become more usable and inferable again. Effectively a
functional dependency ``| a -> b`` says that we can't define multiple
multiparamater typeclass instances with the same ``a`` but different ``b``.

```haskell
λ: convert (42 :: Int)
'42'
λ: convert '*'
42
```

Now let's make things not so simple. Turning on ``UndecidableInstances`` loosens
the constraint on context reduction can only allow constraints of the class to
become structural smaller than it's head. As a result implicit computation can
now occur *within in the type class instance search*. Combined with a type-level
representation of Peano numbers we find that we can encode basic arithmetic at
the type-level.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/16-type-families/fundeps.hs"}
~~~~

If the typeclass contexts look similar to Prolog you're not wrong, if one reads
the contexts qualifier ``(=>)`` backwards as backwards turnstiles ``:-`` then
it's precisely the same equations.

```prolog
add(0, A, A).
add(s(A), B, s(C)) :- add(A, B, C).

pred(0, 0).
pred(S(A), A).
```

This is kind of abusing typeclasses and if used carelessly it can fail to
terminate or overflow at compile-time. ``UndecidableInstances`` shouldn't be
turned on without careful forethought about what it implies.

```haskell
<interactive>:1:1:
    Context reduction stack overflow; size = 201
```

Type Families
-------------

Type families allows us to write functions in the type domain which take types
as arguments which can yield either types or values indexed on their arguments
which are evaluated at compile-time in during typechecking.  Type families come
in two varieties: **data families** and **type synonym families**.

* **type familes** are named function on types
* **data familes** are type-indexed data types

First let's look at *type synonym families*, there are two equivalent syntactic
ways of constructing them.  Either as *associated* type families declared within
a typeclass or as standalone declarations at the toplevel. The following forms
are semantically equivalent, although the unassociated form is strictly more
general:

```haskell
-- (1) Unassociated form
type family Rep a
type instance Rep Int = Char
type instance Rep Char = Int

class Convertible a where
  convert :: a -> Rep a

instance Convertible Int where
  convert = chr

instance Convertible Char where
  convert = ord



-- (2) Associated form
class Convertible a where
  type Rep a
  convert :: a -> Rep a

instance Convertible Int where
  type Rep Int = Char
  convert = chr

instance Convertible Char where
  type Rep Char = Int
  convert = ord
```

Using the same example we used for multiparamater + functional dependencies
illustration we see that there is a direct translation between the type family
approach and functional dependencies. These two approaches have the same
expressive power.

An associated type family can be queried using the ``:kind!`` command in GHCi.

```haskell
λ: :kind! Rep Int
Rep Int :: *
= Char
λ: :kind! Rep Char
Rep Char :: *
= Int
```

*Data families* on the other hand allow us to create new type parameterized data
constructors. Normally we can only define typeclasses functions whose behavior
results in a uniform result which is purely a result of the typeclasses
arguments. With data families we can allow specialized behavior indexed on the
type.

For example if we wanted to create more complicated vector structures (
bit-masked vectors, vectors of tuples, ... ) that exposed a uniform API but
internally handled the differences in their data layout we can use data families
to accomplish this:

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/16-type-families/datafamily.hs"}
~~~~

Injectivity
-----------

The type level functions defined by type-families are not neccessarily
*injective*, the function may map two disctinct input types to the same output
type. This differs from the behavior of type constructors ( which are also
type-level functions ) which are injective.

For example for the constructor ``Maybe``,  ``Maybe t1 = Maybe t2`` implies that
``t1 = t2``.

```haskell
data Maybe a = Nothing | Just a
-- Maybe a ~ Maybe b  implies  a ~ b

type instance F Int = Bool
type instance F Char = Bool

-- F a ~ F b does not imply  a ~ b, in general
```

Roles
-----

Roles are a further level of specification for type variables parameters of
datatypes.

* ``nominal``
* ``representational``
* ``phantom``

They were added to the language to address a rather nasty and long-standing bug
around the correspondence between a newtype and it's runtime representation. The
fundamental distinction that roles introduce is there are two notions of type
equality:

* ``nominal`` - Two types are the same.
* ``representational`` - Two types have the same runtime representation.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/16-type-families/roles.hs"}
~~~~

Roles are normally automatically inferred automatically, but with the
``RoleAnnotations`` extension they can be manually annotated. Except in rare
cases this should not be necessary although it is helpful to know what is going
on under the hood.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/16-type-families/role_infer.hs"}
~~~~

See:

* [Roles: A New Feature of GHC](http://typesandkinds.wordpress.com/2013/08/15/roles-a-new-feature-of-ghc/)
* [Roles](https://ghc.haskell.org/trac/ghc/wiki/Roles)

Monotraversable
---------------

Using type families, mono-traversable generalizes the notion of Functor,
Foldable, and Traversable to include both monomorphic and polymorphic types.

```haskell
omap :: MonoFunctor mono => (Element mono -> Element mono) -> mono -> mono

otraverse :: (Applicative f, MonoTraversable mono)
          => (Element mono -> f (Element mono)) -> mono -> f mono

ofoldMap :: (Monoid m, MonoFoldable mono)
         => (Element mono -> m) -> mono -> m
ofoldl' :: MonoFoldable mono
        => (a -> Element mono -> a) -> a -> mono -> a
ofoldr :: MonoFoldable mono
        => (Element mono -> b -> b) -> b -> mono -> b
```

For example the text type normally does not admit either any of these
type-classes since, but now we can write down the instances that model the
interface of Foldable and Traversable.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/16-type-families/mono.hs"}
~~~~

See: [From Semigroups to Monads](http://fundeps.com/tables/FromSemigroupToMonads.pdf)

NonEmpty
--------

Rather than having degenerate (and often partial) cases of many of the Prelude
functions to accommodate the null case of lists, it is sometimes preferable to
statically enforce empty lists from even being constructed as an inhabitant of a
type.

```haskell
infixr 5 :|, <|
data NonEmpty a = a :| [a]

head :: NonEmpty a -> a
toList :: NonEmpty a -> [a]
fromList :: [a] -> NonEmpty a
```

```haskell
head :: NonEmpty a -> a
head ~(a :| _) = a
```

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/16-type-families/noempty.hs"}
~~~~

In GHC 7.8 ``-XOverloadedLists`` can be used to avoid the extraneous ``fromList`` and ``toList`` conversions.

Manual Proofs
-------------

One of most deep results in computer science, the [Curry–Howard
correspondence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curry%E2%80%93Howard_correspondence),
is the relation that logical propositions can be modeled by types and
instantiating those types constitute proofs of these propositions. Programs are
proofs and proofs are programs.

Types       Logic
-------     -----------
``A``       proposition
``a : A``   proof
``B(x)``    predicate
``Void``    ⊥
``Unit``    ⊤
``A + B``   A ∨ B
``A × B``   A ∧ B
``A -> B``  A ⇒ B

In dependently typed languages we can exploit this result to it's full extent,
in Haskell we don't have the strength that dependent types provide but can still
prove trivial results. For example, now we can model a type level function for
addition and provide a small proof that zero is an additive identity.

```haskell
P 0                   [ base step ]
∀n. P n  → P (1+n)    [ inductive step ]
-------------------
∀n. P(n)
```

```haskell
Axiom 1: a + 0 = a
Axiom 2: a + suc b = suc (a + b)

  0 + suc a
= suc (0 + a)  [by Axiom 2]
= suc a        [Induction hypothesis]
∎
```

Translated into Haskell our axioms are simply are type definitions and recursing
over the inductive datatype constitutes the inductive step of our our proof.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/16-type-families/proof.hs"}
~~~~

Using the ``TypeOperators`` extension we can also use infix notation at the
type-level.

```haskell
data a :=: b where
  Refl :: a :=: a

cong :: a :=: b -> (f a) :=: (f b)
cong Refl = Refl

type family (n :: Nat) :+ (m :: Nat) :: Nat
type instance Zero     :+ m = m
type instance (Succ n) :+ m = Succ (n :+ m)

plus_suc :: forall n m. SNat n -> SNat m -> (n :+ (S m)) :=: (S (n :+ m))
plus_suc Zero m = Refl
plus_suc (Succ n) m = cong (plus_suc n m)
```

Constraint Kinds
----------------

GHC's implementation also exposes the predicates that bound quantifiers in
Haskell as types themselves, with the ``-XConstraintKinds`` extension enabled.
Using this extension we work with constraints as first class types.

```haskell
Num :: * -> Constraint
Odd :: * -> Constraint
```

```haskell
type T1 a = (Num a, Ord a)
```

The empty constraint set is indicated by  ``() :: Constraint``.

For a contrived example if we wanted to create a generic ``Sized`` class that
carried with it constraints on the elements of the container in question we
could achieve this quite simply using type families.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/16-type-families/constraintkinds.hs"}
~~~~

One use-case of this is to capture the typeclass dictionary constrained by a
function and reify it as a value.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/16-type-families/dict.hs"}
~~~~

Both Constraints and AnyK types are somewhat unique in the Haskell
implementation, in that they have the ``BOX`` kind.

```haskell
λ: import GHC.Prim

λ: :kind AnyK
AnyK :: BOX

λ: :kind Constraint
Constraint :: BOX
```
