Quantification
==============

Universal Quantification
------------------------

Universal quantification the primary mechanism of encoding polymorphism in
Haskell. The essence of universal quantification is that we can express
functions which operate the same way for a set of types and whose function
behavior is entirely determined *only* by the behavior of all types in this
span.

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE ExplicitForAll #-}

-- ∀a. [a]
example1 :: forall a. [a]
example1 = []

-- ∀a. [a]
example2 :: forall a. [a]
example2 = [undefined]

-- ∀a. ∀b. (a → b) → [a] → [b]
map' :: forall a. forall b. (a -> b) -> [a] -> [b]
map' f = foldr ((:) . f) []

-- ∀a. [a] → [a]
reverse' :: forall a. [a] -> [a]
reverse' = foldl (flip (:)) []
```

Normally quantifiers are omitted in type signatures since in Haskell's vanilla
surface language it is unambiguous to assume to that free type variables are
universally quantified.

Free theorems
-------------

A universally quantified type-variable actually implies quite a few rather deep
properties about the implementation of a function that can be deduced from it's
type signature. For instance the identity function in Haskell is guaranteed to
only have one implementation since the only information that the information
that can present in the body

```haskell
id :: forall. a -> a
id x = x
```

```haskell
fmap :: Functor f => (a -> b) -> f a -> f b
```

The free theorem of fmap:

```haskell
forall f g. fmap f . fmap g = fmap (f . g)
```

See: [Theorems for Free](http://www-ps.iai.uni-bonn.de/cgi-bin/free-theorems-webui.cgi?)

Type Systems
------------

**Hindley Milner Typesystem**

The Hindley-Milner typesystem is historically import as one of the first typed lambda calculi that admitted
both polymorphism and a variety of inference techniques that could always decide principle types.

```haskell
e : x
  | λx:t.e            -- value abstraction
  | e1 e2             -- application
  | let x = e1 in e2  -- let

t : t -> t     -- function types
  | a          -- type variables

σ : ∀ a . t    -- type scheme
```

In an implementation, the function ``generalize`` converts all type variables
within the type that into polymorphic type variables yielding a type scheme. The
function ``instantiate`` maps a scheme to a type, but with any polymorphic
variables converted into unbound type variables.

**Rank-N Types**

System-F is the type system that underlies Haskell. System-F subsumes the HM
type system in the sense that every type expressible in HM can be expressed
within System-F. System-F is sometimes referred to in texts as the
*Girald-Reynolds polymorphic lambda calculus* or *second-order lambda calculus*.

```haskell
t : t -> t     -- function types
  | a          -- type variables
  | ∀ a . t    -- forall

e : x          -- variables
  | λ(x:t).e   -- value abstraction
  | e1 e2      -- value application
  | Λa.e       -- type abstraction
  | e t        -- type application
```

```haskell
id : ∀ t. t -> t
id = Λt. λx:t. x
id = (\ (@ t) (x :: t) -> x

tr :: ∀ a. ∀ b. a -> b -> a
tr = Λa. Λb. λx:a. λy:b. x

fl :: ∀ a. ∀ b. a -> b -> b
fl = Λa. Λb. λx:a. λy:b. y

nil :: ∀ a. [a]
nil = Λa. Λb. -> λ (z :: b) . λ (f :: a -> b -> b). z

cons :: forall a. a -> [a] -> [a]
cons = Λ a -> λ(x :: a) -> λ(xs :: forall b. b -> (a -> b -> b) -> b)
    -> Λ b -> λ(z :: b) -> λ(f :: a -> b -> b) -> f x (xs @ b z f)
```

Normally when Haskell's typechecker infers a type signature it places all quantifiers of type variables at the
outermost position such that that no quantifiers appear within the body of the type expression, called the
prenex restriction This restrict an entire class of type signatures that are would otherwise expressible
within System-F, but has the benefit of making inference much easier.

``-XRankNTypes`` loosens the prenex restriction such that we may explicitly place quantifiers within the body
of the type. The bad news is that the general problem of inference in this relaxed system is undecidable in
general, so we're required to explicitly annotate functions which use RankNTypes or they are otherwise
inferred as rank 1 and may not typecheck at all.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/11-quantification/rankn.hs"}
~~~~

```haskell
Monomorphic Rank 0: t
Polymorphic Rank 1: forall a. a -> t
Polymorphic Rank 2: (forall a. a -> t) -> t
Polymorphic Rank 3: ((forall a. a -> t) -> t) -> t
```

Of important note is that the type variables bound by an explicit quantifier in
a higher ranked type may not escape their enclosing scope, the typechecker will
explicitly enforce this with by enforcing that variables bound inside of rank-n
types ( called skolem constants ) will not unify with free meta type variables
inferred by the inference engine.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/11-quantification/skolem_capture.hs"}
~~~~

In this example in order for the expression to be well typed, ``f`` would
necessarily have (``Int -> Int``) which implies that ``a ~ Int`` over the whole
type, but since ``a`` is bound under the quantifier it must not be unified with
``Int`` and so the typechecker must fail with a skolem capture error.

```perl
Couldn't match expected type `a' with actual type `t'
`a' is a rigid type variable bound by a type expected by the context: a -> a
`t' is a rigid type variable bound by the inferred type of g :: t -> Int
In the expression: x In the first argument of `escape', namely `(\ a -> x)'
In the expression: escape (\ a -> x)
```

This can actually be used for our advantage to enforce several types of
invariants about scope and use of specific type variables. For example the ST
monad uses a second rank type to prevent the capture of references between ST
monads with separate state threads where the ``s`` type variable is bound within
a rank-2 type and cannot escape, statically guaranteeing that the implementation
details of the ST internals can't leak out and thus ensuring it's referential
transparency.

Existential Quantification
--------------------------

The essence of universal quantification is that we can express functions which operate the same way for *any*
type, while for existential quantification we can express functions that operate over an *some* unknown type.
Using an existential we can group heterogeneous values together with a functions under the existential, that
manipulate the data types but whose type signature hides this information.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/11-quantification/existential.hs"}
~~~~

The existential over ``SBox`` gathers a collection of values defined purely in terms of their their Show
interface, no other information is available about the values and they can't be accessed or unpacked in any
other way.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/11-quantification/existential2.hs"}
~~~~

Use of existentials can be used to recreate certain concepts from the so-called "Object Oriented Paradigm", a
school of thought popularized in the late 80s that attempted to decompose programming logic into
anthropomorphic entities and actions instead of the modern equational treatment. Recreating this model in
Haskell is widely considered to be an antipattern.

See: [Haskell Antipattern: Existential Typeclass](http://lukepalmer.wordpress.com/2010/01/24/haskell-antipattern-existential-typeclass/)

Impredicative Types
-------------------

Although extremely brittle, GHC also has limited support impredicative
polymorphism which allows instantiating type variable with a polymorphic type.
Implied is that this which loosens the restriction that that quantifiers must
precede arrow types and now may be placed inside of type-constructors.

```haskell
-- Can't unify ( Int ~ Char )

revUni :: forall a. Maybe ([a] -> [a]) -> Maybe ([Int], [Char])
revUni (Just g) = Just (g [3], g "hello")
revUni Nothing  = Nothing
```

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/11-quantification/impredicative.hs"}
~~~~

Use of this extension is very rare, and there is some consideration that
``-XImpredicativeTypes`` is fundamentally broken. Although GHC is very liberal
about telling us to enable it when one accidentally makes a typo in a type
signature!

Some notable trivia, the ``($)`` operator is wired into GHC in a very special
way as to allow allow impredicative instantiation of ``runST`` to be applied via
``($)`` by special-casing the ``($)`` operator only when used for the ST monad.
If this sounds like an ugly hack it's because it is, but a rather convenient
hack.

For example if we define a function ``apply`` which should behave identically to
``($)`` we'll get an error about polymorphic instantiation even though they are
defined identically!

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE RankNTypes #-}

import Control.Monad.ST

f `apply` x =  f x

foo :: (forall s. ST s a) -> a
foo st = runST $ st

bar :: (forall s. ST s a) -> a
bar st = runST `apply` st
```

```haskell
    Couldn't match expected type `forall s. ST s a'
                with actual type `ST s0 a'
    In the second argument of `apply', namely `st'
    In the expression: runST `apply` st
    In an equation for `bar': bar st = runST `apply` st
```

See:

* [SPJ Notes on $](https://www.haskell.org/pipermail/glasgow-haskell-users/2010-November/019431.html)

Scoped Type Variables
---------------------

Normally the type variables used within the toplevel signature for a function
are only scoped to the type-signature and not the body of the function and it's
rigid signatures over terms and let/where clauses.  Enabling
``-XScopedTypeVariables`` loosens this restriction allowing the type variables
mentioned in the toplevel to be scoped within the value-level body of a function
and all signatures contained therein.

~~~~ {.haskell include="src/11-quantification/scopedtvars.hs"}
~~~~
